---
layout: post
title: Superset Tutorial
---

# Introduction to Apache Superset

Apache Superset is an open-source data visualization and business intelligence (BI) tool that enables users to explore and analyze data through interactive dashboards and charts. It provides a web-based interface for querying databases, creating visualizations, and sharing insights without requiring extensive coding knowledge.
Superset is designed to be scalable, making it suitable for small teams as well as large enterprises. It supports a variety of databases, including PostgreSQL, MySQL, and BigQuery, through SQLAlchemy. With its intuitive drag-and-drop interface and SQL-based querying capabilities, Superset empowers users to generate meaningful insights efficiently.
This blog will guide you through setting up Apache Superset, connecting it to a database, creating visualizations, and building dashboards. Whether you're a data analyst, engineer, or business user, this guide will help you harness the full potential of Superset for data exploration and storytelling.

# Installation Using Docker Compose
Since `docker compose` is primarily designed to run a set of containers on **a single host** and can't support requirements for **high availability**, we do not support nor recommend using our `docker compose` constructs to support production-type use-cases. For single host environments, it is recommend to use [minikube](https://minikube.sigs.k8s.io/docs/start/) along with the [installing on k8s](https://superset.apache.org/docs/installation/running-on-kubernetes)
documentation.

The fastest way to try Superset locally is using Docker Compose on a Linux or Mac OSX
computer. Superset does not have official support for Windows. It's also the easiest
way to launch a fully functioning **development environment** quickly.

Note that there are 3 major ways we support to run `docker compose`:
1. **docker-compose.yml:** for interactive development, where we mount your local folder with the frontend/backend files that you can edit and experience the changes you make in the app in real time
1. **docker-compose-non-dev.yml** where we just build a more immutable image based on the local branch and get all the required images running. Changes in the local branch at the time you fire this up will be reflected, but changes to the code while `up` won't be reflected in the app
1. **docker-compose-image-tag.yml** where we fetch an image from docker-hub say for the `3.0.0` release for instance, and fire it up so you can try it. Here what's in the local branch has no effects on what's running, we just fetch and run pre-built images from docker-hub. For `docker compose` to work along with the Postgres image it boots up, you'll want to point to a `-dev`-suffixed TAG, as in `export TAG=4.0.0-dev` or `export TAG=3.0.0-dev`, with `latest-dev` being the default. That's because The `dev` builds happen to package the `psycopg2-binary` required to connect
  to the Postgres database launched as part of the `docker compose` builds.

More on these two approaches after setting up the requirements for either.

## Requirements

Note that this documentation assumes that you have [Docker](https://www.docker.com) and [git](https://git-scm.com/) installed. Note also that we used to use `docker-compose` but that is on the path to deprecation so we now use `docker compose` instead.

## 1. Clone Superset's GitHub repository

[Clone Superset's repo](https://github.com/apache/superset) in your terminal with the
following command:

```bash
git clone --depth=1  https://github.com/apache/superset.git
```

Once that command completes successfully, you should see a new `superset` folder in your current directory.

## 2. Launch Superset Through Docker Compose

First let's assume you're familiar with `docker compose` mechanics. Here we'll refer generally to `docker compose up` even though in some cases you may want to force a check for newer remote images using `docker compose pull`, force a build with `docker compose build` or force a build on latest base images using `docker compose build --pull`. In most cases though, the simple `up` command should do just fine. Refer to docker compose docs for more information on the topic.

### Option #1 - for an interactive development environment
```bash
# The --build argument insures all the layers are up-to-date
docker compose up --build
```
### Option #2 - build a set of immutable images from the local branch
```bash
docker compose -f docker-compose-non-dev.yml up
```
### Option #3 - boot up an official release
```bash
export TAG=3.1.1
docker compose -f docker-compose-image-tag.yml up
```
Here various release tags, github SHA, and latest `master` can be referenced by the TAG env var. Refer to the docker-related documentation to learn more about existing tags you can point to from Docker Hub.

## `docker compose` tips & configuration

All of the content belonging to a Superset instance - charts, dashboards, users, etc. - is stored in its metadata database. In production, this database should be backed up.  The default installation with docker compose will store that data in a PostgreSQL database contained in a Docker [volume](https://docs.docker.com/storage/volumes/), which is not backed up.

Again, **DO NOT USE THIS FOR PRODUCTION**

You should see a stream of logging output from the containers being launched on your machine. Once
this output slows, you should have a running instance of Superset on your local machine!  To avoid
the wall of text on future runs, add the `-d` option to the end of the `docker compose up` command.

### Configuring Further
The following is for users who want to configure how Superset runs in Docker Compose; otherwise, you can skip to the next section.
You can install additional python packages and apply config overrides by following the steps mentioned in [docker/README.md](https://github.com/apache/superset/tree/master/docker#configuration)

Note that `docker/.env` sets the default environment variables for all the docker images used by `docker compose`, and that `docker/.env-local` can be used to override those defaults.
Also note that `docker/.env-local` is referenced in our `.gitignore`,
preventing developers from risking committing potentially sensitive configuration to the repository.

One important variable is `SUPERSET_LOAD_EXAMPLES` which determines whether the `superset_init` container will populate example data and visualizations into the metadata database. These examples are helpful for learning and testing out Superset but unnecessary for experienced users and production deployments. The loading process can sometimes take a few minutes and a good amount of CPU, so you may want to disable it on a resource-constrained device.

For more advanced or dynamic configurations that are typically managed in a `superset_config.py` file located in your `PYTHONPATH`, note that it can be done by providing a `docker/pythonpath_dev/superset_config_docker.py` that will be ignored by git(preventing you to commit/push your local configuration back to the repository).
The mechanics of this are in `docker/pythonpath_dev/superset_config.py` where you can see that the logic runs a `from superset_config_docker import *`

## 3. Log in to Superset

Your local Superset instance also includes a Postgres server to store your data and is already pre-loaded with some example datasets that ship with Superset. You can access Superset now via your web browser by visiting `http://localhost:8088`. Note that many browsers now default to `https` - if yours is one of them, please make sure it uses `http`.

Log in with the default username and password:

```bash
username: admin
```

```bash
password: admin
```

## 4. Connecting Superset to your local database instance

When running Superset using `docker` or `docker compose` it runs in its own docker container, as if the Superset was running in a separate machine entirely. Therefore attempts to connect to your local database with the hostname `localhost` won't work as `localhost` refers to the docker container Superset is running in, and not your actual host machine. Fortunately, docker provides an easy way to access network resources in the host machine from inside a container, and we will leverage this
capability to connect to our local database instance.

Here the instructions are for connecting to postgresql (which is running on your host machine) from Superset (which is running in its docker container). Other databases may have slightly different configurations but gist would be same and boils down to 2 steps -

1. **(Mac users may skip this step)** Configuring the local postgresql/database instance to accept public incoming connections. By default, postgresql only allows incoming connections from `localhost` and under Docker, unless you use `--network=host`, `localhost` will refer to different endpoints on the host machine and in a docker container respectively. Allowing postgresql to accept connections from the Docker involves making one-line changes to the files `postgresql.conf` and
`pg_hba.conf`; you can find helpful links tailored to your OS / PG version on the web easily for this task. For Docker it suffices to only whitelist IPs `172.0.0.0/8` instead of `*`, but in any case you are _warned_ that doing this in a production database _may_ have disastrous consequences as you are opening your database to the public internet.
1. Instead of `localhost`, try using `host.docker.internal` (Mac users, Ubuntu) or `172.18.0.1`(Linux users) as the hostname when attempting to connect to the database. This is a Docker internal detail -- what is happening is that, in Mac systems, Docker Desktop creates a dns entry for the hostname `host.docker.internal` which resolves to the correct address for the host machine, whereas in Linux this is not the case (at least by default). If neither of these 2 hostnames work then you may want to find the exact hostname you want to use, for that you can do `ifconfig` or
`ip addr show` and look at the IP address of `docker0` interface that must have been created by Docker for you. Alternately if you don't even see the `docker0` interface try (if needed with sudo) `docker network inspect bridge` and see if there is an entry for `"Gateway"` and note the IP address.

## 4. To build or not to build

When running `docker compose up`, docker will build what is required behind the scene, but may use the docker cache if assets already exist. Running `docker compose build` prior to `docker compose up` or the equivalent shortcut `docker compose up --build` ensures that your docker images matche the definition in the repository. This should only apply to the main docker-compose.yml file (default) and not to the alternative methods defined above.

# Key Features and Functionalities

Apache Superset offers a rich set of features that make it a powerful and flexible tool for data visualization and business intelligence. Below are some of its key capabilities:

## 1. Interactive Data Exploration
- Create dynamic and interactive dashboards with drag-and-drop functionality.
- Apply filters, group data, and drill down into insights without writing code.
- Supports real-time data exploration and visualization.

## 2. Rich Visualization Options
- Provides a wide range of built-in chart types, including bar charts, line charts, scatter plots, pie charts, heatmaps, and geospatial visualizations.
- Custom visualization plugins allow further expansion of available chart types.
- Enables fine-tuned customization of charts through user-friendly configuration panels.

## 3. SQL-Based Querying and Data Processing
- Supports SQL-based querying using an integrated SQL editor.
- Compatible with SQLAlchemy, allowing connection to various relational databases.
- Enables users to save and reuse queries for future analysis.

## 4. Database Connectivity
- Seamlessly integrates with multiple databases such as PostgreSQL, MySQL, BigQuery, Presto, and Snowflake.
- Uses SQLAlchemy for database connections, enabling a standardized approach to querying and data retrieval.
- Provides a metadata browser to explore database schemas and table structures.

## 5. Scalability and Performance
- Designed to handle large-scale data analysis by leveraging distributed query engines like Presto and Druid.
- Asynchronous query execution improves performance and responsiveness.
- Caching mechanisms enhance dashboard load times and reduce database load.

## 6. Access Control and Security
- Supports role-based access control (RBAC) to manage user permissions.
- Integration with authentication providers like OAuth, LDAP, and database-based authentication.
- Ensures secure data access and sharing through user-specific permissions.

## 7. Extensibility and Customization
- Open-source and highly customizable, allowing users to extend functionality with plugins and APIs.
- REST API support enables integration with external applications and automation workflows.
- Theming options allow customization of UI elements to match branding requirements.

## 8. Collaboration and Sharing
- Enables easy sharing of dashboards and reports within teams.
- Supports scheduled reports and alerts based on predefined conditions.
- Users can export visualizations as images or CSV files for further analysis.

With these features, Apache Superset is a powerful tool for anyone looking to gain insights from data through interactive visualizations and dashboards. The following sections will guide you through the installation, setup, and practical use of Superset.

# Use Cases

Apache Superset is a versatile tool that can be applied across various domains and industries. Below are some common use cases where Superset proves valuable:

## 1. Business Intelligence and Reporting
- Create interactive dashboards to monitor key business metrics.
- Track sales performance, customer behavior, and financial trends in real time.
- Enable stakeholders to explore data without needing SQL knowledge.

## 2. Data Exploration and Analysis
- Perform ad-hoc analysis on large datasets without writing complex queries.
- Use filters, groupings, and aggregations to uncover insights quickly.
- Explore raw data before building machine learning models or making business decisions.

## 3. Monitoring and Observability
- Visualize system performance metrics, server logs, and application health.
- Set up alerting mechanisms for anomalies in business or IT operations.
- Integrate with real-time databases and stream processing engines for live monitoring.

## 4. Financial and Market Analysis
- Analyze stock market trends, economic indicators, and investment data.
- Build financial reports that aggregate data from multiple sources.
- Track risk exposure and fraud detection using data-driven insights.

## 5. Healthcare and Clinical Data Visualization
- Analyze patient records, hospital performance, and treatment outcomes.
- Track disease outbreaks and healthcare trends using geospatial visualizations.
- Enhance research through interactive data exploration of clinical studies.

## 6. Supply Chain and Logistics
- Optimize supply chain operations by visualizing inventory, demand, and shipping data.
- Monitor real-time logistics data, including delivery times and warehouse efficiency.
- Reduce costs by identifying inefficiencies through data-driven decision-making.

## 7. Education and Research
- Analyze student performance, attendance, and engagement metrics.
- Use interactive dashboards for academic research and data visualization.
- Share insights with educators and policymakers to improve learning outcomes.

## 8. Government and Public Sector
- Improve policy-making with data-driven governance.
- Track public services, infrastructure projects, and budget allocations.
- Enhance transparency by making data available for public analysis.

With these diverse applications, Apache Superset serves as a powerful tool for organizations and individuals looking to transform raw data into actionable insights. In the next sections, we will explore how to install, configure, and use Superset effectively.

# Conclusion

Apache Superset is a powerful, open-source data visualization and business intelligence tool that enables users to explore, analyze, and share insights with ease. With its interactive dashboards, diverse visualization options, and support for multiple databases, Superset is an excellent choice for organizations looking to make data-driven decisions without heavy technical dependencies.

In this tutorial, we covered the key features and functionalities of Superset, explored its practical use cases, and provided insights into how it can be leveraged for various industries. Whether you are a data analyst, engineer, or business user, Superset offers a scalable and user-friendly solution for data exploration and reporting.

By integrating Superset into your workflow, you can enhance data accessibility, improve decision-making, and streamline analytics processes. As an open-source project, it continues to evolve with contributions from the community, making it a flexible and future-proof solution.

We hope this tutorial has provided you with a solid foundation to start using Apache Superset effectively. Happy exploring!
# References and Further Reading

For more in-depth knowledge about Apache Superset, refer to the following official documentation, tutorials, and community resources:

## Official Documentation
- [Apache Superset Documentation](https://superset.apache.org/docs/intro) – The official documentation covering installation, configuration, and advanced usage.
- [Superset GitHub Repository](https://github.com/apache/superset) – The source code and contributions from the open-source community.

## Tutorials and Guides
- [Getting Started with Apache Superset](https://superset.apache.org/docs/installation/installing-superset) – Step-by-step guide to setting up Superset.
- [Superset SQL Lab Guide](https://superset.apache.org/docs/sql_lab) – Learn how to write and execute SQL queries in Superset.
- [Building Dashboards in Superset](https://superset.apache.org/docs/creating-charts-dashboards) – A guide to creating and customizing interactive dashboards.

## Community and Support
- [Apache Superset Slack Channel](https://apache-superset.slack.com) – Join the Superset community for discussions and support.
- [Superset User Group](https://lists.apache.org/list.html?dev@superset.apache.org) – Official mailing list for discussions and announcements.
- [Stack Overflow - Superset](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/tagged/apache-superset) – Browse community-driven Q&A for troubleshooting and best practices.

## Related Technologies
- [SQLAlchemy](https://www.sqlalchemy.org/) – The database toolkit used by Superset.
- [Druid](https://druid.apache.org/) – A high-performance database often used with Superset for large-scale analytics.
- [Presto](https://prestodb.io/) – A distributed SQL query engine compatible with Superset.

These resources will help you dive deeper into Superset and enhance your data visualization and analytics skills. Keep exploring and happy learning!
